Initial version of Analyzers specs (#9853)
dotnet/msbuild: documentation/specs/proposed/BuildCheck.md

* Standards of `.editorconfig`s will be observed. 
* Simplified authoring experience via template and doc.
* Single analyzer can produce reports for multiple rules. However those need to be declared upfront
* Opt-in reporting of time spent via specific analyzers and infra overall.
* Collect touched `.editorconfg`s into binlog embedded files.
* Possibility to opt-out from analysis - the perf should not be impacted then
* Team collects performance impact numbers on the OrchardCore build with the inbox analyzers enabled.

**Non Goals, but subject for consideration**
* Custom anlyzer in a local project (source codes) or a binary.
* Bulk configuration of multiple rules (based on prefixes).
* Specifying scope of MSBuild imports that will be considered for analysis (so that e.g. data from sdk won't even be passed to anlyzer, if not requested).
* Attempts to try to configure standard msbuild warnings/errors via `.editorconfig` should lead to fail fast errors.
* Configuring analysis levels when analysing from binlog - beyond the collected editorconfigs
* Rich information in VS error window.

**Out of scope**
* Custom analyzers with equal data access as built-in

> * All inbox analyzers reports have precise location(s) of issues

Author: I'm very split on this.

Yes - it feels we should have only the top quality reports. On the other hand I do not think it should be something in power of stopping the whole feature from shipping.

One reason is that locations are not part of BuildEventArgs contracts - so there is nontrivial amount of work behind surfacing them in API (without exposing the distributed nature of the build).

Other reason is that there might be some very valuable analyses (e.g. double writes, especially if we'd employ I/O tracking) where corelating precise location might be preventing introducing such analyser.

How about that being a non-goal? :-)

> * All inbox analyzers reports have precise location(s) of issues

Author: @ladipro does this wording sound better? https://github.com/JanKrivanek/msbuild/blob/doc/analyzers/documentation/specs/proposed/BuildCheck.md?plain=1#L64

* `.editorconfig` files placed along with explicitly or implicitly imported msbuild files won’t be considered.
* `.editorconfig` files packaged within nuget packages won’t be considered (unless the unpack action will place them alongside the referencing project).

Non-Goals (but might be considered):
* bulk configuration of multiple rules - based on analyzers/rules prefixes or/and categories.
* attempts to try to configure standard msbuild warnings/errors via `.editorconfig` should lead to fail fast errors.
* configuring analysis levels when analysing from binlog - beyond the collected editorconfigs.
* Aliasing the analyzers/rules, allowing to create multiple instances with different custom configuration (e.g. single analyzer checking configurable list of forbidden properties prefixes can have 2 instance, each initialized with different list to check, each of the instance configurable for individual projects separately).

Out of scope for configuration:
* opt-out of analysis on code-level (analogy to C# pragmas, but within msbuild xml files).
* lower granularity of `.editorconfig` settings other than whole projects.

> * attributing configuration to a .sln file and expecting it will apply to all contained projects.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what's exactly meant by this. Presumably one `.editorconfig` at repo root would apply to all projects.

Author: I'll specify better.

The idea is, we won't support this:

```
# I expect this to apply to all projects within my solution, but not to projects which are not part of the solution
[MySpecialSolutionWithJustSubsetOfProjects.sln]
msbuild_analyzer.BC0101.IsEnabled=true
msbuild_analyzer.BC0101.Severity=warning
```

### Sample configuration
(TBD)

## Analyzers and Rules Identification

**TBD**

* Recommended and reserved prefixes
* Short vs descriptive names
* Rules categories
* Ability to use prefixes during configuration

## Custom Analyzers Authoring

### Implementation

To author custom analyzer, user will need to implement given contract (delivered in Microsoft.Build package). The contract will provide access to the exposed Build OM focused on build analysis.

#### Analyzer declaration

Simplified proposal:

```csharp
public abstract class BuildAnalyzer : IDisposable
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Friendly name of the analyzer.
    /// Should be unique - as it will be used in the tracing stats, infrastructure error messages, etc.
    /// </summary>
    public abstract string FriendlyName { get; }

    /// <summary>
    /// Single or multiple rules supported by the analyzer.
    /// </summary>

>     public abstract IReadOnlyList<BuildAnalyzerRule> SupportedRules { get; }

Reviewer: Ideally this data would be declared somewhere else so we don't have to load the analyzer assembly and instantiate the class just to see that none of the rules are enabled and the analyzer is not needed. Likely not a v1 feature, though.

# BuildCheck - Design Spec

Previously known as "warning waves" and "MSBuild Analyzers"

The feature is meant to help customers to improve and understand quality of their MSBuild scripts via rules violations reporting. It will allow MSBuild to gradually roll out additional rules, as users will be capable to configure their opt-in and severity of reports – preventing unwanted build breakages. And to equip powerusers to roll out their own quality checks – whether for general community or internal enterprise usage.

# Terminology

* **Analyzer** – unit of execution (single implementing class), can host multiple rules. 
* **Rule** – Single violation type, with single unique code (`“BC1234: Redefining built-in target”`). 
* **Report** – Output from Analyzer informing about violating particular rule.
* **CodeFix** – Violation remedy suggestion. Not yet applicable for MSBuild.
* **BuildCheck** - Feature name. The infrastructure within MSBuild allowing pluggability and execution of Analyzers and their Rules

# North Star / Longer-term vision

> MSBuild provides a rich OM exposing the build scripts, data and execution so that various quality checking rules can be authored. This includes static analysis rules (e.g. checking validity of condition expressions) as well as build execution rules (e.g. checking of referencing nonexistent files) and composition rules (e.g. unintended outputs overwrites checking). Identical OM is exposed from live build execution and via post-build log event sourcing – so that users can choose whether the build analysis will happen as part of the build or as a separate process.

Reviewer 2: Could you explain this statement "MSBuild provides a rich **OM** exposing the build scripts" better?

Author: Rephrased

> MSBuild provides a rich OM exposing the build scripts, data and execution so that various quality checking rules can be authored. This includes static analysis rules (e.g. checking validity of condition expressions) as well as build execution rules (e.g. checking of referencing nonexistent files) and composition rules (e.g. unintended outputs overwrites checking). Identical OM is exposed from live build execution and via post-build log event sourcing – so that users can choose whether the build analysis will happen as part of the build or as a separate process.

Reviewer 2: Do we have any references/code examples for this part?
_"Identical OM is exposed from live build execution and via post-build"_

Author: This is a North Star vision only - no samples yet

Users are able to tune the behavior of the checks via `.editorconfig` which brings unified and standardized experience with other tooling (including built-in and third-party C# analyzers) leveraging `.editorconfig` files.

Powerusers are able to develop, test and publish their custom analyzers easily and contribute them back to community. The local development scenario doesn’t require roundtrip through packaging.

A solid set of in-the-box analyzers is provided by MSBuild and the .NET SDK, extended each release, with high quality reports (pointing exact locations of issue, offering clear and actionable explanations, not repetitive for builds with multi-execution or/and multi-importing of a same script in single build context). The existing in-the-box analyzers are gradually enabled by default and their severity increased - in waves (likely tied to sdk releases) - aiming to constantly increase quality of our customers build scripts. MSBuild.exe (and hence Visual Studio) builds will take more conservative approach with requiring an explicit opt-in into the analyzers - in order to not introduce upgrade blockers. 

> The analysis has small impact on build duration with ability to opt-out from analysis altogether which will remove all the performance costs associated with the analysis.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention the way we plan to control the perf impact (perf star)?

Author: Added the mention (without concretizing the tech - as this is rather a customer spec)

# Scope of initial iteration

Majority of following cases are included in appropriate context within the scenarios in [User Experience](#user-experience) section. Following is a quick overview.

> ## In scope

Reviewer 2: I can't recall if we considered adding telemetry in v1. Did we?

Author: Added as "out of scope"
It's very nice to have - but given the existing nontrivial sciope and overall lack of MSBuild telemetry instrumentation and collecting - I wouldn't consider it a blocker for release. It though should be added very soon post v1

> * Inbox (built-in) analyzers that run during the build execution.

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to specify how we split the analyzers into categories such as built-in and custom/external.
Is it about the data we can expose or tech restrictions, etc?
It will help to understand the customers when it is possible to consider creating their own analyzers.

Author: The different handling of inbox and custom analyzers is rather a deficiency (ideally temporary) rather then feature - so it might be unnecessary confusing detail in the user doc. I went into little more details in the second doc (the 'BuildCheck-Architecture.md') - that is better suited as reference for MsBuild devs.

* Inbox analyzers that run when replaying binlog.
* Custom authored analyzers, delivered via nuget.
* Analyzers reports (errors, warnings, messages) are in logger output, VS error window.
* Codes will be distinguishable from standard build warnings/error (to prevent easy mixups and attempts to configure standard msbuild warnings/errors via editorconfig), but otherwise the outputs are very similar.
* Default opt-ins and levels for inbox analyzers set by sdk version (via [`$SdkAnalysisLevel`]((https://github.com/dotnet/designs/blob/main/proposed/sdk-analysis-level.md))) or other agreed mechanism for controlling increasing strictness between .NET versions.
* Custom analyzers opted in via `PackageReference` of a particular nuget with the analyzer.
* Explicit overrides of enablement and analysis levels via `.editorconfig` file (with up to a per-project scope).

> * Standards of `.editorconfig`s will be observed. 

Reviewer 2: do we have a link to the standards?

> * Simplified authoring experience via template and doc.

Reviewer 2: this one is on me

Author: There is a `Packaging` section down in the document where additional details would definitely be helpful. 

(Plus the `Acquistion` section in the BuildCheck-Architecture.md doc)

* Single analyzer can produce reports for multiple rules. However those need to be declared upfront.
* Opt-in reporting of time spent via specific analyzers and infra overall.
* Collect touched `.editorconfig`s into binlog embedded files.
* Possibility to opt-out from analysis - the perf should not be impacted when done so.
* Team collects performance impact numbers on a set of benchmark builds with the inbox analyzers enabled.

## Non Goals, but subject for consideration
* Custom analyzer in a local project (source codes) or a binary.
* Bulk configuration of multiple rules (based on prefixes).
* Specifying scope of MSBuild imports that will be considered for analysis (so that e.g. data from sdk won't even be passed to analyzer, if not requested).
* Attempts to try to configure standard msbuild warnings/errors via `.editorconfig` should lead to fail fast errors.
* Configuring analysis levels when analyzing from binlog - beyond the collected editorconfigs

> * Rich information in VS error window.

Reviewer 2: It's not clear to me. 
We plan to report to VS, according to the https://github.com/dotnet/msbuild/blob/10746e13e55c987a4deb5f9b5486b027b7ec5aa7/documentation/specs/proposed/BuildCheck.md#user-experience:~:text=in%20logger%20output%2C-,VS%20error%20window,-., but not in a "rich" way. Could you explain what it means?

Author: Rephrased

* lower granularity of `.editorconfig` settings other than whole projects.
* attributing configuration to a .sln file and expecting it will apply to all contained projects.
* Support for multiple [custom configurations](#custom-configuration-declaration) within a single build for a single rule. (Not to be mixed with [standardized configuration](#standardized-configuration-declaration) - which can be configured freely per project) If a custom configuration will be used, it will need to be specified identically in each explicit configurations of the rule. This is chosen so that there are no implicit requirements on lifetime of the analyzer or analyzer instancing – each analyzer will be instantiated only once per build (this is however something that will very likely change in future versions – so authors are advised not to take hard dependency on single instance policy).

### Sample configuration

```ini
[*.csproj]
build_check.BC0101.IsEnabled=true
build_check.BC0101.Severity=warning

build_check.COND0543.IsEnabled=false
build_check.COND0543.Severity=Error
build_check.COND0543.EvaluationAnalysisScope=AnalyzedProjectOnly

> build_check.COND0543.CustomSwitch=QWERTY

Reviewer: I think this should be updated to use the Roslyn conventions, e.g. `severity=none` instead of `IsEnabled=false`.

Configuration will dictate transformation of the analyzer report to particular build output type (message, warning or error).

Each rule has a severity, even if multiple rules are defined in a single analyzer. The rule can have different severities for different projects within a single build session.

If all the rules from a single analyzer have severity `None` - analyzer won't be given any data for such configured part of the build (specific project or a whole build). If analyzer have some rules enabled and some disabled - it will be still fed with data, but the reports will be post-filtered.

#### Scope of Analysis

Option `EvaluationAnalysisScope` with following possible options will be available:
* `AnalyzedProjectOnly` - Only the data from currently analyzed project will be sent to the analyzer. Imports will be discarded.
* `AnalyzedProjectWithImportsFromCurrentWorkTree` - Only the data from currently analyzed project and imports from files under the entry project or solution will be sent to the analyzer. Other imports will be discarded.
* `AnalyzedProjectWithImportsWithoutSdks` - Imports from SDKs will not be sent to the analyzer. Other imports will be sent.

> * `AnalyzedProjectWithAllImports` - All data will be sent to the analyzer.

Reviewer: nit: Could these be trimmed to `ProjectOnly` and `ProjectWith...`?

Author: Btw. it will need to overall go through rethinking: https://github.com/orgs/dotnet/projects/373?pane=issue&itemId=57851137

* Localization support (for reports message formats, identifiers, etc.).
* Custom analyzers have equal data access as the inbox analyzers. We'll aim to ship analyzers that use public BuildCheck API/OM surface. But for extra agility we might chose to implement and ship some analyzers using unexposed data.
* All inbox analyzers reports have precise location(s) of issues (however for each individual analyzer not providing precise location we should have a very strong reason, why location cannot be provided and why it still brings value even without precise location).
* Opt-out of analysis on code-level (something like C# `#pragma warning disable`, but within msbuild xml files).
* Simplified authoring experience via dedicated reference assembly.
* Restore phase analysis.
* Turning analysis off/on based on target (e.g. multi-targeted builds, calling MSBuild task etc.).
* Controlling/Configuring lifetime of analyzers - analyzers will currently be held alive, as single instance per analyzer, for the whole duration of the build. But future versions might prevent some of the analyzers to survive beyond a scope of a single project built (means for sharing data would be provided).

> * Event Tracing for Windows (ETW) for analyzers.

Author: It's not a must have for instrumentation. Basically - while nice to have, it's not a blocker of the feature

A solid set of in-the-box analyzers is provided by MSBuild and the .NET SDK, extended each release, with high quality reports (pointing exact locations of issue, offering clear and actionable explanations, not repetitive for builds with multi-execution or/and multi-importing of a same script in single build context). The existing in-the-box analyzers are gradually enabled by default and their severity increased - in waves (likely tied to sdk releases) - aiming to constantly increase quality of our customers build scripts. Full Framework (and hence Visual Studio) builds will take more conservative approach with requiring an explicit opt-in into the analyzers - in order to not introduce upgrade blockers. 

The analysis has small impact on build duration with ability to opt-out from analysis altogether which will remove all the performance costs associated with the analysis.

# Scope of initial iteration

Majority of following cases are included in appropriate context within the scenarios in [User Experience](#user-experience) section. Following is a quick overview.

**In scope**

> * Inbox (build-in) analyzers that run during the build execution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Inbox (built-in) analyzers that run during the build execution.
```

> * Inbox analyzers that run when replaying binlog.

Reviewer 3: For the category that is "stuff we wish we could have warned on and now we can", I think the only thing that should change on replay is severity, rather than actually doing analysis.

Author: I'm not sure I understand :-)
What if the binlog was produced by MSBuild withut analyzers support or with analysis turned off? Then we'd need to run the analyzers to get the report from the binlog without the reports.

If the binlog already contains analyzers reports - then yes - we might need to somehow handle the case differently (but that doesn't feel as a necessary goeal for V1)

* Custom authored analyzers, delivered via nuget.
* Analyzers reports (errors, warnings, messages) are in logger output, VS error window.
* Codes will be distinguishable from standard build warnings/error (to prevent easy mixups and attempts to configure standard msbuild warnings/errors via editorconfig), but otherwise the outputs are very similar.

> * Default opt-ins and levels for inbox analyzers set by sdk version (via [`$SdkAnalysisLevel`]((https://github.com/dotnet/designs/blob/main/proposed/sdk-analysis-level.md))) or other agreed mechanism for controling increasing strictness between .NET versions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Default opt-ins and levels for inbox analyzers set by sdk version (via [`$SdkAnalysisLevel`]((https://github.com/dotnet/designs/blob/main/proposed/sdk-analysis-level.md))) or other agreed mechanism for controlling increasing strictness between .NET versions.
```

* Custom analyzers opted in via `PackageReference` of a particular nuget with the analyzer.

> * Explicit overrides of enablement and analysis levels via `.editorconfig` file (with up to a per project scope).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Explicit overrides of enablement and analysis levels via `.editorconfig` file (with up to a per-project scope).
```

* Standards of `.editorconfig`s will be observed. 
* Simplified authoring experience via template and doc.
* Single analyzer can produce reports for multiple rules. However those need to be declared upfront.

> * Opt-in reporting of time spent via specific analyzers and infra overall.

Reviewer 3: I kinda want to make this non-optional: if you use analyzers the binlog will have analyzer-perf information in it.

* Collect touched `.editorconfg`s into binlog embedded files.
* Possibility to opt-out from analysis - the perf should not be impacted when done so.
* Team collects performance impact numbers on a set of benchmark builds with the inbox analyzers enabled.

> **Non Goals, but subject for consideration**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Non Goals, but subject for consideration
```

* Custom anlyzer in a local project (source codes) or a binary.
* Bulk configuration of multiple rules (based on prefixes).
* Specifying scope of MSBuild imports that will be considered for analysis (so that e.g. data from sdk won't even be passed to anlyzer, if not requested).
* Attempts to try to configure standard msbuild warnings/errors via `.editorconfig` should lead to fail fast errors.
* Configuring analysis levels when analysing from binlog - beyond the collected editorconfigs
* Rich information in VS error window.

> **Out of scope**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Out of scope
```

* Design time build analysis.

> * Localization support (for reports message formats, identifiers, etc.).

Reviewer 3: writing down that we should check on Roslyn's loc story and make sure we aren't causing problems here--MSBuild is multilingual first.

Author: @baronfel would you see a localization support for the custom authored analyzers as a must have requirement for a V1?

The inbox analyzers will be localized as any other MSBuild code.

Custom analyzers are currently not planned to be localizable for V1 - similarly as we lack the support for the custom tasks.

On the other hand Roslyn provides such support today:
https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/blob/main/docs/analyzers/Localizing%20Analyzers.md

* Custom analyzers have equal data access as the inbox analyzers. We'll aim to ship analyzers that use public BuildCheck API/OM surface. But for extra agility we might chose to implement and ship some analyzers using unexposed data.
* All inbox analyzers reports have precise location(s) of issues (however for each individual analyzer not providing precise location we should have a very strong reason, why location cannot be provided and why it still brings value even without precise location).
* Opt-out of analysis on code-level (something like C# `#pragma warning disable`, but within msbuild xml files).
* Simplified authoring experience via dedicated reference assembly.
* Restore phase analysis.
* Turning analysis off/on based on target (e.g. multi-targetted builds, calling MSBuild task etc.).

> * Controling/Configuring lifetime of analyzers - analyzers will currently be held alive, as single instance per analyzer, for the whole duration of the build. But future versions might prevent some of the analyzers to survive beyond a scope of a single project built (means for sharing data would be provided).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Controlling/Configuring lifetime of analyzers - analyzers will currently be held alive, as single instance per analyzer, for the whole duration of the build. But future versions might prevent some of the analyzers to survive beyond a scope of a single project built (means for sharing data would be provided).
```

> * ETW for analyzers.

Reviewer 3: Would this be expensive? Feels like it should be done by default.

Author: It should not be, it just doesn't feel like something that should hold the feature from releasing.

Findings - reports - of analyzers will be output as build messages/warnings/errors, and the message/warnings/error code should help distinguish BuildCheck produced reports from regular build errors/warnings.

### Binlog Replay mode

Users will have option to explicitly opt-in to run BuildCheck during the binlog replay mode:

```bash
> dotnet build msbuild.binlog /analyze
```

Would there be any analyzers that are not possible to run during the replay mode (subject to internal design - this difference won't be exposed during [custom analyzers authoring](#custom-analyzers-authoring)), replay mode will inform user about those via warnings.

Replay mode will by default consider `.editorconfig` files stored within the binlog and will run analyzers based on those. This may lead to unintended double-reports – as binlog will have the runtime analysis reports stored, plus the replay-time analysis reports will be augumented.

For this reason we will consider following modes (all are non-goals):
* Ability to specify skipping all binlog stored reports
* Ability to specify skipping of the stored .editorconfig files

> * Ability to specify single replay-time .editorconfig file and it’s precedence (only the specified, specified as most significant, specified as least significant)

Reviewer 3: This seems fine but I want to focus on the user scenarios for these:

* Pilot enabling new rules against a binlog
* debugging a problem by enabling related rules against the log.

Author: Those should be exactly enabled by specifying the reply-time .editorconfig.
Let me put that more explicitly - as the info is obscured by the mentioned double-reporting  scenario.

## Configuration

There will be 3 mechanisms of configuring the analyzers and rules:
* The default configuration declared by the analyzers themselves ([more details on implementation](#rules-declaration))
* [Sdk Analysis Level property](https://github.com/dotnet/designs/blob/main/proposed/sdk-analysis-level.md) – mostly for the inbox analyzers
* `.editorconfig` file

For the `.editorconfig` file configuration, following will apply:
* Only `.editorconfig` files collocated with the project file or up the folder hierarchy will be considered.
* `.editorconfig` files placed along with explicitly or implicitly imported msbuild files won’t be considered.
* `.editorconfig` files packaged within nuget packages within local nuget cache won’t be considered.

> Non-Goals (but might be considered):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Non-Goals (but might be considered):
```

* bulk configuration of multiple rules - based on analyzers/rules prefixes or/and categories.
* attempts to try to configure standard msbuild warnings/errors via `.editorconfig` should lead to fail fast errors.
* configuring analysis levels when analysing from binlog - beyond the collected editorconfigs.
* Aliasing the analyzers/rules, allowing to create multiple instances with different custom configuration (e.g. single analyzer checking configurable list of forbidden properties prefixes can have 2 instance, each initialized with different list to check, each of the instance configurable for individual projects separately).

> Out of scope for configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Out of scope for configuration:
```

Findings - reports - of analyzers will be output as build messages/warnings/errors, and the message/warnings/error code should help distinguish BuildCheck produced reports from regular build errors/warnings.

### Binlog Replay mode

Users will have option to explicitly opt-in to run BuildCheck during the binlog replay mode:

```bash
> dotnet build msbuild.binlog /analyze
```

Would there be any analyzers that are not possible to run during the replay mode (subject to internal design - this difference won't be exposed during [custom analyzers authoring](#custom-analyzers-authoring)), replay mode will inform user about those via warnings.

Replay mode will by default consider `.editorconfig` files stored within the binlog and will run analyzers based on those. This may lead to unintended double-reports – as binlog will have the runtime analysis reports stored, plus the replay-time analysis reports will be augumented. At the same time we might want to run some additional checks in the replay mode, that have not been enabled (or not even available) during the build time.

For this reason we will consider following modes (all are non-goals):

> * Ability to specify skipping all binlog stored reports

Author: I agree.
I adjusted this to

```
 *  All binlog stored reports are skipped by default. We add option to request not skipping them (but they might need to be prefixed or otherwise distinguished from the 'fresh' reports).
```

https://github.com/JanKrivanek/msbuild/blob/doc/analyzers/documentation/specs/proposed/BuildCheck.md?plain=1#L118

* lower granularity of `.editorconfig` settings other than whole projects.
* attributing configuration to a .sln file and expecting it will apply to all contained projects.
* Support for multiple [custom configurations](#custom-configuration-declaration) within a single build for a single rule. (Not to be mixed with [standardized configuration](#standardized-configuration-declaration) - which can be configured freely per project) If a custom configuration will be used, it will need to be specified identically in each explicit configurations of the rule. This is chosen so that there are no implicit requirements on lifetime of the analyzer or analyzer instancing – each analyzer will be instantiated only once per build (this is however something that will very likely change in future versions – so authors are advised not to take hard dependency on single instance policy).

### Sample configuration

```ini
[*.csproj]
msbuild_analyzer.BC0101.IsEnabled=true
msbuild_analyzer.BC0101.Severity=warning

msbuild_analyzer.COND0543.IsEnabled=false
msbuild_analyzer.COND0543.Severity=Error
msbuild_analyzer.COND0543.EvaluationAnalysisScope=AnalyzedProjectOnly

> msbuild_analyzer.COND0543.CustomSwitch=QWERTY

Reviewer: In @f-alizada's implementation the prefix is `build_check.`. Presumably `msbuild_analyzer.` is a left-over from before the rename and should be updated?

```

### User Configurable Options

Initial version of BuildCheck plans a limited set of options configurable by user (via `.editorconfig`) by which users can override default configuration of individual analyzer rules.

#### Enablement

Boolean option `IsEnabled` will be available to allow users to disable/enable particualr rule.

Different rules of a single analyzer can have different enablement status configured.

> If all the rules from a single analyzer are disabled - analyzer won't be given any data for such configured part of the build (specific project or a whoe build). If analyzer have some rules enabled and some disabled - it will be still fed with data, but the reports will be post-filtered.

Reviewer: nit: Typo "whoe".

> If all the rules from a single analyzer are disabled - analyzer won't be given any data for such configured part of the build (specific project or a whoe build). If analyzer have some rules enabled and some disabled - it will be still fed with data, but the reports will be post-filtered.

Reviewer: > **If analyzer have some rules enabled and some disabled ...**

This begs the question of whether the analyzer can know which of its rules are disabled, to give it the ability to avoid potential expensive processing.

Author: https://github.com/orgs/dotnet/projects/373?pane=issue&itemId=57761219

Same rule can have different enablement status for different projects.

#### Severity

Option `Severity` with following values will be available:

> * `Message`

Author: Yes - we should align here.
And yes - we should inform the analyzer about severity `==` or `!=` `none`

captured here: https://github.com/orgs/dotnet/projects/373?pane=issue&itemId=57761219
and I'll updatede the doc

* `Warning`
* `Error`

Configuration will dictate transformation of the analyzer report to particular build output type (message, warning or error).

Each rule has a severity, even if multiple rules are defined in a single analyzer. The rule can have different severities for different projects within a single build session.

#### Scope of Analysis

> Option `EvaluationAnalysisScope` with following possible options will be avaialable:

Reviewer: nit: Typo "avaialable".

> Option `EvaluationAnalysisScope` with following possible options will be avaialable:

Reviewer: Looking at `.editorconfig` conventions, they seem to prefer short lower-case identifiers with words delimited by underscores. Would maybe `analysis_scope` be enough? Or `evaluation_analysis_scope`.

Author: Added a note that all naming is yet to be determined.
We'll have snake_case convention for editorconfig and PascalCase convention for the configuration keys in API. The configuration module should transparently translate between those two (except for unrecognized custom keys - they will be left untouched)

#### Custom configuration declaration

However if user will specify additional – unrecognized - values in `.editorconfig` file as part of a particular analyzer configuration – those values will be extracted as key-value pairs and passed to the analyzer initialization call (`Initialize`) via `ConfigurationContext`:

```csharp
/// <summary>
/// Holder of an optional configuration from .editorconfig file (not recognized by the infrastructure)
/// </summary>
public class ConfigurationContext
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Custom configuration data - per each rule that has some specified.
    /// </summary>
    public CustomConfigurationData[] CustomConfigurationData { get; init; }
}
```

This can allow creation of extendable checks – e.g. a check that will validate that properties defined within project do not start with any forbidden prefix, while actual prefixes to check are configurable – so the user of the check can tune the behavior to their needs.

More details on configuration are in [Configuration](#configuration) section.

#### Compatibility

> All the publicly exposed contracts will be available within `Microsoft.Build.Experimental.BuildCheck` interface. The interface is expressing that contracts are not guaranteed to be backward compatible (however breakage will be limited to necessary cases). The availability of particular set of BuildCheck API will be queryable via [Feature Query API](https://github.com/dotnet/msbuild/pull/9665):

Reviewer: nit: s/interface/namespace/g ?

Also custom analyzer package is a dependency is a purely development time harness - so it should be marked as [`DevelopmentDependency`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/reference/nuspec#developmentdependency).

In order to simplify the packaging process (and meeting above mentioned requiements) a dotnet template will be provided producing proper package on pack action.

**TBD** - dotnet new sample on initiating the development.

## Acquisition of custom analyzers

Apart from [inbox analyzers](#inbox-analyzers) (shipped together with msbuild), users will be able to plug-in packaged analyzers shipped as nugets (this will serve for community contributions, but possibly as a venue for off-cycle distribution of official analyzers).

In order to use an analyzer package users just need to reference them via `<PackageReference>` element as standard package reference. 

```xml
<PackageReference Include="Contoso.Analyzers" Version="1.2.3" />
```

> Only projects referencing the package will be able to run its analyzers. Enabling the rules from package on other projects won’t take any effect.

Reviewer: I'm thinking when `.editorconfig` attempts to configure an analyzer for a project but the project doesn't reference it, we should let the user know because they likely didn't do this on purpose. What do you think?

Author: That definitely sound as a good idea - I cannot think of any downsides.
I'll add this as a non-goal (it's not a blocker, but a very nice to have think, while low cost) and track it with bumped up priority

Author: https://github.com/orgs/dotnet/projects/373?pane=issue&itemId=57849480

# BuildCheck - Design Spec

> AKA MSBuild Analyzers

Reviewer 4: Meta-comment: as a .NET dev, the term "analyzers" suggests to me that this is static analysis on the XML language itself, however that's not the case. Consider coming up with a different name to avoid overloading the term. That would also keep the name free for any future static analysis of MSBuild's language.

Author: This is a good point showing that we might need to have a short section on the actual OM and plans for that. As static analysis should actually be a subset - not a distinct set - of our analyses.

In any case - 'Analyzers' is mentioned as that's how we used to refere to the feature - so the reader know it's still same thing

Reviewer 3: Yeah responding to similar feed back we renamed and now the different name is "BuildCheck".

      + [Inbox Analyzers](#inbox-analyzers)
      + [Live Build](#live-build)
      + [Binlog Replay mode](#binlog-replay-mode)
   * [Configuration](#configuration)
      + [User Configurable Options](#user-configurable-options)
         - [Enablement](#enablement)
         - [Severity](#severity)
         - [Scope of Analysis](#scope-of-analysis)
      + [Sample configuration](#sample-configuration)
   * [Analyzers and Rules Identification](#analyzers-and-rules-identification)
   * [Custom Analyzers Authoring](#custom-analyzers-authoring)
      + [Implementation](#implementation)
         - [Analyzer declaration](#analyzer-declaration)
         - [Rules declaration](#rules-declaration)
         - [Standardized configuration declaration](#standardized-configuration-declaration)
         - [Custom configuration declaration](#custom-configuration-declaration)
         - [Compatibility](#compatibility)
      + [Testing and Debugging](#testing-and-debugging)
      + [Packaging](#packaging)
   * [Acquisition of custom analyzers](#acquisition-of-custom-analyzers)

# Terminology

* **Analyzer** – unit of execution (single implementing class), can host multiple rules. 

> * **Rule** – Single violation type, with single unique code (`“MSB123: Redefining built-in target”`). 

Reviewer 3: Please don't use MSB prefix in examples, we want people to do something distinct (so we don't get blamed :-P).

Author: Good catch.

100%

* **Report** – Output from Analyzer informing about violating particular rule.
* **CodeFix** – Violation remedy suggestion. Not yet applicable for MSBuild.
* **BuildCheck** - Feature name. The infrastructure within MSBuild allowing pluggability and execution of Analyzers and their Rules

# North Star / Longer-term vision

MSBuild provides a rich OM exposing the build scripts, data and execution so that various quality checking rules can be authored. Identical OM is exposed from live build execution and via post-build log event sourcing – so that users can choose whether the build analysis will happen as part of the build or as a separate process.

> Users are able to tune the behavior of the checks via `.editorconfig` which brings unified and standardized experience with other tooling leveraging `.editorconfig` files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Users are able to tune the behavior of the checks via `.editorconfig` which brings unified and standardized experience with other tooling (including built-in and third-party C# analyzers) leveraging `.editorconfig` files.
```

Powerusers are able to develop, test and publish their custom analyzers easily and contribute them back to community. The local development scenario doesn’t require roundtrip through packaging.

> Solid set of in-the-box analyzers is provided by the dotnet team, extended each release, with high quality reports (pointing exact locations of issue, offering clear and actionable explanations, not repetitive for builds with multi-execution or/and multi-importing of a same script in single build context).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A solid set of in-the-box analyzers is provided by MSBuild and the .NET SDK, extended each release, with high quality reports (pointing exact locations of issue, offering clear and actionable explanations, not repetitive for builds with multi-execution or/and multi-importing of a same script in single build context).
```

> The analysis has small impact on build duration with ability to opt-out from analysis altogether which will remove all the performance costs associated with the analysis.

Reviewer 3: Opt out or opt in? I feel perf DDRITs will require opt-in . . .

Author: So very intitialy (pre-release) - the analyzers will be opt-in.

In some mature state the analyzers will be opt-out.

The big question is when we switch between those two modes - V1 / V2? Current wishfull thinking is V1.

I'll try to mention and discuss this more explicitly in the doc

* Default opt-ins and levels for inbox analyzers set by sdk version (via [`$SdkAnalysisLevel`]((https://github.com/dotnet/designs/blob/main/proposed/sdk-analysis-level.md))) or other agreed mechanism for controling increasing strictness between .NET versions.
* Custom analyzers opted in via `PackageReference` of a particular nuget with the analyzer.
* Explicit overrides of enablement and analysis levels via `.editorconfig` file (with up to a per project scope).
* Standards of `.editorconfig`s will be observed. 
* Simplified authoring experience via template and doc.
* Single analyzer can produce reports for multiple rules. However those need to be declared upfront.
* Opt-in reporting of time spent via specific analyzers and infra overall.
* Collect touched `.editorconfg`s into binlog embedded files.
* Possibility to opt-out from analysis - the perf should not be impacted when done so.
* Team collects performance impact numbers on a set of benchmark builds with the inbox analyzers enabled.

**Non Goals, but subject for consideration**

> * Custom anlyzer in a local project (source codes) or a binary.

Author: Unfortunately we have the chicken-egg problem here - we need to learn about analyzer much sooner.
That's why the magic intrinsic function has been defined for this purpose. With `PackageReference` we can count on the eraly import of the build assets within the package. With `ProjectReference` (or `Reference`) there is no similar mechanism (# packages-projects substitutability :-))

So different tricks will need to be used here

* Bulk configuration of multiple rules (based on prefixes).
* Specifying scope of MSBuild imports that will be considered for analysis (so that e.g. data from sdk won't even be passed to anlyzer, if not requested).
* Attempts to try to configure standard msbuild warnings/errors via `.editorconfig` should lead to fail fast errors.
* Configuring analysis levels when analysing from binlog - beyond the collected editorconfigs
* Rich information in VS error window.

**Out of scope**

> * Custom analyzers has equal data access as the inbox analyzers.

Reviewer 3: IMO we need a third category:

* Engine analyses/diagnostics enabled in the same way as BuildChecks
* In-box analyzers that use the public API surface
* Third-party analyzers.

> * Custom analyzers has equal data access as the inbox analyzers.

Author: @baronfel as Rainer mentioned - this is just to aid us some extra agility without sacrificing stability of public API. We are alowing ourselves to use data that we're not yet ready to expose publically (or that will need to be sourced and abstracted differently for public API).

I'll specify better

* All inbox analyzers reports have precise location(s) of issues.

> * Opt-out of analysis on code-level (analogy to C# pragmas, but within msbuild xml files).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Opt-out of analysis on code-level (something like C# `#pragma warning disable`, but within msbuild xml files).
```

* Simplified authoring experience via dedicated reference assembly.
* Restore phase analysis.
* Turning analysis off/on based on target (e.g. multi-targetted builds, calling MSBuild task etc.).
* Controling/Configuring lifetime of analyzers - analyzers will currently be held alive, as single instance per analyzer, for the whole duration of the build. But future versions might prevent some of the analyzers to survive beyond a scope of a single project built (means for sharing data would be provided).
* ETW for analyzers.
* Attributing `.editorconfig` configurations to .sln files.
* Attributing `.editorconfig` configurations to lower granularity than whole projects.
* Respecting `.editorconfig` file in msbuild import locations (unless they are in the parent folders hieararchy of particular project file).
 

> # User Experience

Reviewer 3: I'd move this section above the initial scope stuff I think.

Author: I prefer to have the scope first now - as that's where I want most attention of initial readers (to get early feedback if something important is not properly considered).

We can rearange once this becomes more of a user doc.

## Running / UX

### Inbox Analyzers

**TBD** - suggested list of analyzers to be shipped with V1 (along with proposed configuration)

### Live Build

BuildCheck will run as part of the build and execute [inbox analyzers](#inbox-analyzers) and [custom analyzers](#acquisition-of-custom-analyzers) based on the [configuration](#configuration). Users will have an option to completely opt-out from BuildCheck to run via commandline switch.

Findings - reports - of analyzers will be otput as build messages/warnings/errors, while the code should help distinguish BuildCheck produced reports from regular build errors/warnings.

### Binlog Replay mode

Users will have option to explicitly opt-in to run BuildCheck during the binlog replay mode:

```bash
> dotnet build msbuild.binlog /analyze
```

Would there be any analyzers that are not possible to run during the replay mode (subject to internal design - this difference won't be exposed during [custom analyzers authoring](#custom-analyzers-authoring)), replay mode will inform user about those via warnings.

> Replay mode will by default consider `.editorconfig` files stored within the binlog and will run analyzers based on those. This may lead to double-reports – as binlog will have the runtime analysis reports stored, plus the replay-time analysis reports will be augumented.

Reviewer 3: Is the double reporting intentional? Feels like it could be a won't-fix bug for v1 but doesn't seem like something we intentionally want.

Author: My wording obviously needs some tweaking here :-)

As the message I wanted to transfer was what you pointed out - "not intended, but possibly not high priority for addressing in v1"

For this reason we will consider following modes (all are non-goals):
* Ability to specify skipping all binlog stored reports
* Ability to specify skipping of the stored .editorconfig files
* Ability to specify single replay-time .editorconfig file and it’s precedence (only the specified, specified as most significant, specified as least significant)

## Configuration

There will be 3 mechanisms of configuring the analyzers and rules:
* The default configuration declared by the analyzers themselves ([more details on implementation](#rules-declaration))
* [Sdk Analysis Level property](https://github.com/dotnet/designs/blob/main/proposed/sdk-analysis-level.md) – mostly for the inbox analyzers
* `.editorconfig` file

For the `.editorconfig` file configuration, following will apply:
* Only `.editorconfig` files collocated with the project file or up the folder hierarchy will be considered.
* `.editorconfig` files placed along with explicitly or implicitly imported msbuild files won’t be considered.

> * `.editorconfig` files packaged within nuget packages won’t be considered (unless the unpack action will place them alongside the referencing project).

Reviewer 3: As a rule there's no "unpack action" in modern NuGet beyond "unzip to packages folder", I'd drop that part.

Author: Ah OK.

Btw. there still can be custom build target doing a similar thing I suppose.. but probably not that doesn't need to be mentioned, as project folder locvation is already mentioned above..

Non-Goals (but might be considered):
* bulk configuration of multiple rules - based on analyzers/rules prefixes or/and categories.

> * attempts to try to configure standard msbuild warnings/errors via `.editorconfig` should lead to fail fast errors.

Reviewer 3: How would we detect this?

Author: I do not have strong answer now :-) but if it's easy - let's do that, if not - it's not a goal.

Anyway - I expect the detection being alongside of collecting all configurations with `msbuild_analyzer` prefix and then checking if the following tag doesn't start with `MSB`

Reviewer 3: Oh NON goals 🤦🏻 ignore this one

* attributing configuration to a .sln file and expecting it will apply to all contained projects.
* Support for multiple [custom configurations](#custom-configuration-declaration) within a single build for a single rule. (Not to be mixed with [standardized configuration](#standardized-configuration-declaration) - which can be configured freely per project) If a custom configuration will be used, it will need to be specified identically in each explicit configurations of the rule. This is chosen so that there are no implicit requirements on lifetime of the analyzer or analyzer instancing – each analyzer will be instantiated only once per build (this is however something that will very likely change in future versions – so authors are advised not to take hard dependency on single instance policy).

### User Configurable Options

Initial version of BuildCheck plans a limited set of options configurable by user (via `.editorconfig`) by which users can override default configuration of individual analyzer rules.

#### Enablement

Boolean option `IsEnabled` will be available to allow users to disable/enable particualr rule.

> Different rules of a single analyzer can have different enabledment status configured.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Different rules of a single analyzer can have different enablement status configured.
```

If all the rules from a single analyzer are disabled - analyzer won't be given any data for such configured part of the build (specific project or a whoe build). If analyzer have some rules enabled and some disabled - it will be still fed with data, but the reports will be post-filtered.

Same rule can have different enablement status for different projects.

#### Severity

Option `Severity` with following values will be available:

* `Message`
* `Warning`
* `Error`

Configuration will dictate transformation of the analyzer report to particular build output type (message, warning or error).

> Different rules of a single analyzer can have different severities configured. Same rule can have different severities for different projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each rule has a severity, even if multiple rules are defined in a single analyzer. The rule can have different severities for different projects within a single build session.
```

#### Scope of Analysis

> Option `EvaluationAnalysisScope` with following possible options will be avaialable:

Reviewer 3: What's the right level of configuration here? I was thinking of this as something that the analyzer/rule declared, rather than something end-user configurable. But I'm not sure that's right!

Author: It's both - analyzer provides defualt, user can override.

If during the authoring we find out there might be rules where user-overriding is not desired - let's then think about selectively preventing

* `AnalyzedProjectOnly` - Only the data from currently analyzed project will be sent to the analyzer. Imports will be discarded.
* `AnalyzedProjectWithImportsFromCurrentWorkTree` - Only the data from currently analyzed project and imports from files under the entry project or solution will be sent to the analyzer. Other imports will be discarded.

> * `AnalyzedProjectWithImportsWithoutSdks` - Imports from SDKs will not be sent to the analyzer. Other imports will be sent.

Reviewer 3: So this is "include NuGet-delivered logic but not SDK-delivered logic"? What's the use case for that?

Author: I'm still unsure if we need this.

But I was thinking about a scenario of local development loop of package - where devs still might need to go the nuget roundtrip. But there might be a better answers to that possibly (e.g. additional development root location?)

* `AnalyzedProjectWithAllImports` - All data will be sent to the analyzer.

> All rules of a single analyzer must have the `EvaluationAnalysisScope` configured to a same value. If any rule from the analyzer have the value configured differently - a warning will be issued during the build and analyzer will be deregistered.

Author: While Rule is a unit of configuration, the analyzer is the unit of execution - analyzer is being fed with data from the infrastructure.
If the infrastructure is supposed to pre-filter data being fed into the analyzer, then it applies to the whole analyzer.

The alternative design is that the analyzer would need to decide by itself what data to accept and what data to filter out - then the analyzer could do that separately per each rule. However this way the infrastructure wouldn't be able to give any guarantees about corectness of the outputs.

> All rules of a single analyzer must have the `EvaluationAnalysisScope` configured to a same value. If any rule from the analyzer have the value configured differently - a warning will be issued during the build and analyzer will be deregistered.

Author: This as well means that multiple rules should be grouped into single analyzer with care.

Same rule can have `EvaluationAnalysisScope` configured to different values for different projects.

BuildCheck might not be able to guarantee to properly filter the data with this distinction for all [registration types](#RegisterActions) - in case an explicit value is attempted to be configured (either [from the analyzer code](#BuildAnalyzerConfiguration) or from `.editorconfig` file) for an analyzer that has a subscription to unfilterable data - a warning will be issued during the build and analyzer will be deregistered.

> ### Sample configuration

Reviewer 3: IMO move this up to the top of this section, I wanted it immediately to provide context for the details.

```
[*.csproj]

> msbuild_analyzer.BC0101.IsEnabled=true

Reviewer 3: Is the `msbuild_analyzer` prefix required? Should it be `buildcheck` now?

Author: I agree.

@maridematte FYI

msbuild_analyzer.BC0101.Severity=warning

msbuild_analyzer.COND0543.IsEnabled=false
msbuild_analyzer.COND0543.Severity=Error
msbuild_analyzer.COND0543.EvaluationAnalysisScope=AnalyzedProjectOnly
msbuild_analyzer.COND0543.CustomSwitch=QWERTY
```

## Analyzers and Rules Identification

**TBD**

* Recommended and reserved prefixes
* Short vs descriptive names
* Rules categories
* Ability to use prefixes during configuration

## Custom Analyzers Authoring

### Implementation

> To author custom analyzer, user will need to implement given contract (delivered in Microsoft.Build package). The contract will provide access to the exposed Build OM focused on build analysis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To author custom analyzer, user will need to implement given contract (delivered in Microsoft.Build package). The contract will provide access to the exposed BuildCheck OM focused on build analysis.
```

#### Analyzer declaration

Simplified proposal:

```csharp
public abstract class BuildAnalyzer : IDisposable
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Friendly name of the analyzer.
    /// Should be unique - as it will be used in the tracing stats, infrastructure error messages, etc.
    /// </summary>
    public abstract string FriendlyName { get; }

    /// <summary>
    /// Single or multiple rules supported by the analyzer.
    /// </summary>
    public abstract IReadOnlyList<BuildAnalyzerRule> SupportedRules { get; }

    /// <summary>
    /// Optional initialization of the analyzer.
    /// </summary>
    /// <param name="configurationContext">
    /// Custom data (not recognized by the infrastructure) passed from .editorconfig
    /// Currently the custom data has to be identical for all rules in the analyzer and all projects.
    /// </param>
    public abstract void Initialize(ConfigurationContext configurationContext);

    /// <summary>
    /// 
    /// </summary>
    /// <param name="context"></param>
    public abstract void RegisterActions(IBuildCheckRegistrationContext context);

    public virtual void Dispose()
    { }
}
```

> <a name="RegisterActions" />The context in `RegisterActions` call will enable subscriptions for data pumping from the infrastructure. 

Reviewer 3: this `<a>` seems to confuse GH markdown rending

Sample of how registrations might look like:

```csharp
public interface IBuildCheckRegistrationContext
{
    void RegisterEvaluatedPropertiesAction(Action<BuildCheckDataContext<EvaluatedPropertiesAnalysisData>> evaluatedPropertiesAction);

    void RegisterParsedItemsAction(Action<BuildCheckDataContext<ParsedItemsAnalysisData>> parsedItemsAction);

    // ...
}
```

> The data provide in callbacks will allow analyzer to submit reports for its rules. Single callback can lead to multiple reports being generated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The data provided in callbacks for registered actions will allow the analyzer to submit reports for its rules. A single callback can lead to multiple reports being generated.
```

Any analyzer will be allowed to produce reports only for Rules that it declared in it’s `SupportedRules` definition.

#### Rules declaration

> Single analyzer can declare support of multiple rules – since it might produce reports for those on top of same input data – and for efficiency reasons a single processing of data might be needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A single analyzer can declare support of multiple rules – since it might produce reports for those on top of same input data – and for efficiency reasons a single processing of data might be needed.
```

Simplified proposal of definition of a single rule:

```csharp
public class BuildAnalyzerRule
{

>     // Identification/Description fields

Reviewer 3: Can you expand on this? Is it identifier, long name/description? Are there loc options?

Author: Current proposal: https://github.com/dotnet/msbuild/pull/9735/files#diff-ffa5a8cc14988d03c021f4d451517d358aa148a11ef06068db7298ec7ceac914R24-R49

But it is in high need of deeper thinking through and revisiting: https://github.com/dotnet/msbuild/issues/9823

Localization is a great point! I need to put it into out of scope section :-)

    /// <summary>
    /// The default configuration - overridable by the user via .editorconfig.
    /// If no user specified configuration is provided, this default will be used.
    /// </summary>
    public BuildAnalyzerConfiguration DefaultConfiguration { get; }
}
```

> <a name="BuildAnalyzerConfiguration" />Each rule will supply its default configuration (mainly enablement and report severity) – those will apply if `.editorconfig` file will not set those settings explicitly. If the rule doesn't provide (some of) its defaults, a global hardcoded defults are used (`severity: message, enabled: false`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<a name="BuildAnalyzerConfiguration" />Each rule will supply its default configuration (mainly enablement and report severity) – those will apply if `.editorconfig` file will not set those settings explicitly. If the rule doesn't provide (some of) its defaults, a global hardcoded default is used (`severity: message, enabled: false`).
```

#### Standardized configuration declaration

Proposal of configuration specification:

```csharp
/// <summary>
/// Configuration for a build analyzer.
/// Default values can be specified by the Analyzer in code.
/// Users can overwrite the defaults by explicit settings in the .editorconfig file.
/// Each rule can have its own configuration, which can differ per each project.
/// The <see cref="EvaluationAnalysisScope"/> setting must be same for all rules in the same analyzer (but can differ between projects)
/// </summary>
public class BuildAnalyzerConfiguration
{
    /// <summary>
    /// This applies only to specific events, that can distinguish whether they are directly inferred from
    ///  the current project, or from some import. If supported it can help tuning the level of detail or noise from analysis.
    ///
    /// If not supported by the data source - then the setting is ignored
    /// </summary>
    public EvaluationAnalysisScope? EvaluationAnalysisScope { get; internal init; }

    /// <summary>

>     /// The severity of the result for the rule.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    /// The default severity of the result for the rule. May be overridden by user configuration.
```

    /// </summary>
    public BuildAnalyzerResultSeverity? Severity { get; internal init; }

    /// <summary>
    /// Whether the analyzer rule is enabled.

>     /// If all rules within the analyzer are not enabled, it will not be run.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    /// If no rule within the analyzer is enabled, the whole analyzer will not be run.
```

    /// If some rules are enabled and some are not, the analyzer will be run and reports will be post-filtered.
    /// </summary>

>     public bool? IsEnabled { get; internal init; }

Reviewer 3: Why nullable?

Author: All the configs are optional now.

https://github.com/JanKrivanek/msbuild/blob/c38e806c1dc14c1f65c072f6fb5a05606327f46b/documentation/specs/proposed/BuildCheck.md?plain=1#L304

Though it is very much not a strong need nor opinion - we can change this.

#### Custom configuration declaration

However if user will specify additional – unrecognized - values in `.editorconfig` file as part of a particular analyzer configuration – those values will be extracted as key-value pairs and passed to the analyzer initialization call (`Initialize`) via `ConfigurationContext`:

```csharp
/// <summary>
/// Holder of an optional configuration from .editorconfig file (not recognized by the infrastructure)
/// </summary>
public class ConfigurationContext
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Custom configuration data - per each rule that has some specified.
    /// </summary>
    public CustomConfigurationData[] CustomConfigurationData { get; init; }
}
```

This can allow creation of extendable checks – e.g. a check that will validate that properties defined within project do not start with any forbidden prefix, while actual prefixes to check are configurable – so the user of the check can tune the behavior to their needs.

More details on configuration are in [Configuration](#configuration) section.

#### Compatibility

> All the publicly exposed contracts will be available within `Microsoft.Build.Experimental.BuildCheck` interface. The interface is expressing that contracts are not guaranteed to be forward compatible (however breakage will be limited to necessary cases). The availability of particular set of BuildCheck API will be queryable via [Feature Query API](https://github.com/dotnet/msbuild/pull/9665):

Reviewer 3: Not sure I understand the "forward compatible" thing here. Can you give an example of when it wouldn't be and what would happen?

Author: Bad wording - it needs rephrasing.
I meant fwd compatible from the point of view of the packaged analyzer.
Basicaly If pacakge is authored against V-X of the API, shipped and then some user tries to load it within a build exposing V-(X+1) API, this could possibly lead to issues in loading the anlyzer (our infra should properly handle this - issue warning and ignore the analyzer), as it'd try to reference nonexistent contracts.

### Packaging

Several requirements are mandated for analyzer packages to be properly recognized (Netstandard only, A call to designated property function will need to be part of the packaged build assets, dependencies will need to be packaged, binaries structure flattened).

Also such a dependency is a purely development time harness - so it should be marked as [`DevelopmentDependency`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/reference/nuspec#developmentdependency).

In order to simplify the packaging process (and meeting above mentioned requiements) a dotnet template will be provided producing proper package on pack action.

**TBD** - dotnet new sample on initiating the development.

## Acquisition of custom analyzers

Apart from [inbox analyzers](#inbox-analyzers) (shipped together with msbuild), users will be able to plug-in packaged analyzers shipped as nugets (this will serve for community contributions, but possibly as a venue for off-cycle distribution of official analyzers).

In order to use an analyzer package users just need to reference them via `<PackageReference>` element as standard package reference. 

```xml

> <PackageReference Include="Contoso.Analyzers" Version="1.2.3" />

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<PackageReference Include="Contoso.BuildChecks" Version="1.2.3" />
```

Author: I'd actuall keep this as `Analyzers`.
Originaly I wanted to choose a codename to distinguish the infra (now BuildCheck) and the actual checks (now still analyzers)

Reviewer 3: Hm, I envisioned renaming all of the related concepts. I think that is more consistent, less confusing, and more ~Google~Bingable. Let's discuss :)

Reviewer 4: +1 for a single name here. Aliasing and/or subtle distinctions create confusion and dilute the concept's "branding".

Author: Understood.

Let's rename (Build)Analyzer -> BuildCheck

Entering item for this - will happen soon

# BuildCheck - Design Spec

> AKA MSBuild Analyzers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Previously known as "warning waves" and "MSBuild Analyzers"
```

The feature is meant to help customers to improve and understand quality of their MSBuild scripts via rules violations reporting. It will allow MSBuild to gradually roll out additional rules, as users will be capable to configure their opt-in and severity of reports – preventing unwanted build breakages. And to equip powerusers to roll out their own quality checks – whether for general community or internal enterprise usage.

> # Table of Contents
> 
> - [Terminology](#terminology)
> - [North Star / Longer-term vision](#north-star-longer-term-vision)
> - [Scope of initial iteration](#scope-of-initial-iteration)
> - [User Experience](#user-experience)
>    * [Running / UX](#running-ux)
>       + [Inbox Analyzers](#inbox-analyzers)
>       + [Live Build](#live-build)
>       + [Binlog Replay mode](#binlog-replay-mode)
>    * [Configuration](#configuration)
>       + [Sample configuration](#sample-configuration)
>       + [User Configurable Options](#user-configurable-options)
>          - [Enablement](#enablement)
>          - [Severity](#severity)
>          - [Scope of Analysis](#scope-of-analysis)
>    * [Analyzers and Rules Identification](#analyzers-and-rules-identification)
>    * [Custom Analyzers Authoring](#custom-analyzers-authoring)
>       + [Implementation](#implementation)
>          - [Analyzer declaration](#analyzer-declaration)
>          - [Rules declaration](#rules-declaration)
>          - [Standardized configuration declaration](#standardized-configuration-declaration)
>          - [Custom configuration declaration](#custom-configuration-declaration)
>          - [Compatibility](#compatibility)
>       + [Testing and Debugging](#testing-and-debugging)
>       + [Packaging](#packaging)
>    * [Acquisition of custom analyzers](#acquisition-of-custom-analyzers)
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 3: GitHub markdown does a ToC automatically so you can skip manually maintaining it :)

```suggestion
```

Author: Oh good point!
Removing both ToCs
